---
title: "I went through a round of tech interviews, and it was fine"
date: 2018-11-21T22:04:31-07:00
author: Henry
permalink: /interview-experience
draft: true
layout: post
categories:
    - Misc
    - Interviewing
---

I joined Cloudera in April 2009. The circumstances of my joining are a good story, but are far in
the distant past. At the time Cloudera was an escape route from a PhD that wasn't going very far, an
opportunity to apply what I had taught myself about distributed systems, and an opportunity to see
tech culture up close. There's more to write about my experiences at Cloudera, when time and
distance allows, but in this post I want to talk about the experience of moving to somewhere new,
rather than leaving the old.

I stayed at Cloudera through any number of changes, shifts, scaling events, directional adjustments,
departures and successes. I was lucky enough to see a company go public from the inside. And then,
after nearly nine-and-a-half years, I decided I'd seen enough. During those nine-and-a-half years
though, despite naturally my satisfaction waxing and waning, I never seriously embarked on any kind
of job search.

I mention this only to contextualise the situation I found myself in last July. I had spent a couple
of weeks in Europe with my family, and realised I wasn't eager to get back to work. That meant it
was time to find some work that I was eager to get back to.

The prospect filled me with some trepidation. Although conventional wisdom tells you to test the
market frequently in order to calibrate your own 'worth', I had never bothered to. Which meant that
was nearly ten years since I had last had a tech interview. I therefore had _no_ sense of my own
'worth', my competency as it would be evaluated during the interview process or what kind of market
I would find for my skills.

You don't have to look far to find articles about horrific tech interview experiences. Indeed, you
could understandably reach the conclusion that tech interviews are _by construction_ awful.

The TL;DR of this post is that I interviewed at a bunch of places, and it all went fine. As a
counterpoint to the awful experiences of others, I want to talk about my experience, what went well
for me, and to shed as much sunlight as I can on the process (without violating those awful NDAs)
with an aim of demystifying tech interviews.

#### Caveat

Tech interviewing is probably broken! Just because I had a good set of experiences doesn't mean
there aren't significant structural issues. I don't mean to defend the interview process here,
rather show that _despite_ the process, you too can survive and do well - it doesn't have to be
awful for you.

It's also important to be clear about the fact that I'm playing tech on easy mode: I am male, white,
able-bodied, cisgender. I also have an English accent. The issues that others may face because they
are _not_ all of these things must not be denied. My only hope is that, perhaps, they don't _have_
to affect everyone that they might, based on my experience of talking to a majority of decent,
seemingly kind people, and if so there might be less reason to be nervous. But I cannot speak to the
experiences of others.

* Filtering companies for 'decent' experiences. This means looking at the kind of people that work
  there, seeing how they communicate (and how the company communicates), taking some note of the
  interview reputation.

* Ask a ton of questions. Think about what's important to you. Ask about it. For me, what was
  important was enough flexibility in the role that I could be as present at my kid's schools as was
  possible - time to go to family lunches, to volunteer occasionally, to work from home when school
  was closed, and so on.

* I got exactly 1 non-standard data structure question. But, it didn't rely on a trick - instead it
  was designed to test how well I thought about invariants, and if I could address a problem on its
  merits rather than some restatement of a well-known problem. I didn't do well on this question! I jumped straight to a complicated answer where I had to maintain a great deal of
